src/skills/backend/email/resend+react-email (@vince)/examples/async-batch.md, before:

# Email - Async and Batch Sending Examples

> Non-blocking email sending and batch API patterns. See [SKILL.md](../SKILL.md) for core concepts and [core.md](core.md) for basic send pattern.

---

## Pattern 1: Fire and Forget

Send emails without blocking the response.

```typescript
// lib/email/async-email.ts
import type { SendEmailOptions } from "./send-email";
import { sendEmailWithRetry } from "./send-with-retry";

// Queue for tracking in-flight emails (for graceful shutdown)
const inFlightEmails = new Set<Promise<unknown>>();

export function sendEmailAsync(options: SendEmailOptions): void {
  const promise = sendEmailWithRetry(options)
    .catch((err) => {
      console.error("[Email] Async send failed:", err);
    })
    .finally(() => {
      inFlightEmails.delete(promise);
    });

  inFlightEmails.add(promise);
}

// For graceful shutdown - wait for all emails to complete
export async function flushPendingEmails(): Promise<void> {
  await Promise.all(inFlightEmails);
}

// Named exports
export { sendEmailAsync, flushPendingEmails };
```

---

## Pattern 2: Usage in API Route

Non-blocking email in a signup flow.

```typescript
// app/api/signup/route.ts
import { NextRequest, NextResponse } from "next/server";

import { auth } from "@/lib/auth";
import { sendEmailAsync } from "@/lib/email/async-email";
import { WelcomeEmail } from "@repo/emails";

export async function POST(request: NextRequest) {
  const body = await request.json();

  // Create user (blocking - required for response)
  const user = await auth.api.signUpEmail({
    body: {
      email: body.email,
      password: body.password,
      name: body.name,
    },
  });

  // Send welcome email asynchronously (non-blocking)
  sendEmailAsync({
    to: user.email,
    subject: "Welcome to Your App!",
    react: WelcomeEmail({
      userName: user.name ?? "there",
      loginUrl: `${process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_APP_URL}/login`,
    }),
  });

  // Return immediately - email sends in background
  return NextResponse.json({ success: true, user });
}
```

**Why good:** Signup response is fast (doesn't wait for email), email failures don't break the signup flow, flushPendingEmails enables graceful shutdown

---

## Pattern 3: Batch Email Function

Send to multiple recipients efficiently using Resend's batch API.

```typescript
// lib/email/batch-email.ts
import { render } from "@react-email/components";

import { getResendClient, DEFAULT_FROM_ADDRESS, DEFAULT_FROM_NAME } from "@repo/emails";

const MAX_BATCH_SIZE = 100; // Resend limit per batch request

interface BatchEmailItem {
  to: string;
  subject: string;
  react: React.ReactElement;
}

interface BatchSendResult {
  success: boolean;
  data?: { id: string }[];
  errors?: string[];
}

export async function sendBatchEmails(
  emails: BatchEmailItem[]
): Promise<BatchSendResult> {
  const resend = getResendClient();
  const results: { id: string }[] = [];
  const errors: string[] = [];

  // Split into batches of MAX_BATCH_SIZE
  for (let i = 0; i < emails.length; i += MAX_BATCH_SIZE) {
    const batch = emails.slice(i, i + MAX_BATCH_SIZE);

    // Render all emails in batch
    const renderedEmails = await Promise.all(
      batch.map(async (email) => ({
        from: `${DEFAULT_FROM_NAME} <${DEFAULT_FROM_ADDRESS}>`,
        to: email.to,
        subject: email.subject,
        html: await render(email.react),
      }))
    );

    try {
      const { data, error } = await resend.batch.send(renderedEmails);

      if (error) {
        errors.push(`Batch ${Math.floor(i / MAX_BATCH_SIZE) + 1}: ${error.message}`);
      } else if (data) {
        results.push(...data);
      }
    } catch (err) {
      const message = err instanceof Error ? err.message : "Unknown error";
      errors.push(`Batch ${Math.floor(i / MAX_BATCH_SIZE) + 1}: ${message}`);
    }
  }

  return {
    success: errors.length === 0,
    data: results.length > 0 ? results : undefined,
    errors: errors.length > 0 ? errors : undefined,
  };
}

// Named export
export { sendBatchEmails };
export type { BatchEmailItem, BatchSendResult };
```

---

## Pattern 4: Batch Usage Example

Send notifications to all team members.

```typescript
// Send notifications to all team members
import { sendBatchEmails } from "@/lib/email/batch-email";
import { NotificationEmail } from "@repo/emails";

async function notifyTeamMembers(
  members: { email: string; name: string }[],
  notification: { title: string; body: string; actionUrl: string }
) {
  const emails = members.map((member) => ({
    to: member.email,
    subject: notification.title,
    react: NotificationEmail({
      userName: member.name,
      notificationType: "update" as const,
      title: notification.title,
      body: notification.body,
      actionUrl: notification.actionUrl,
      actionText: "View Update",
      unsubscribeUrl: `https://example.com/unsubscribe?email=${member.email}`,
    }),
  }));

  const result = await sendBatchEmails(emails);

  if (!result.success) {
    console.error("[Email] Batch send had errors:", result.errors);
  }

  return result;
}
```

**Why good:** Handles Resend's 100-email batch limit, renders all templates in parallel, returns detailed results per batch

---

## Decision Tree: Single vs Batch

```
How many emails?
+-- 1 email --> resend.emails.send()
+-- 2-100 emails --> resend.batch.send()
+-- 100+ emails --> Loop with batch API
```

Commit message:

docs(skills/api): enhance backend skills with updated patterns and references

src/skills/backend/email/resend+react-email (@vince)/examples/async-batch.md, after:

# Email - Async and Batch Sending Examples

> Non-blocking email sending and batch API patterns. See [SKILL.md](../SKILL.md) for core concepts and [core.md](core.md) for basic send pattern.

---

## Pattern 1: Fire and Forget

Send emails without blocking the response.

```typescript
// lib/email/async-email.ts
import type { SendEmailOptions } from "./send-email";
import { sendEmailWithRetry } from "./send-with-retry";

// Queue for tracking in-flight emails (for graceful shutdown)
const inFlightEmails = new Set<Promise<unknown>>();

export function sendEmailAsync(options: SendEmailOptions): void {
  const promise = sendEmailWithRetry(options)
    .catch((err) => {
      console.error("[Email] Async send failed:", err);
    })
    .finally(() => {
      inFlightEmails.delete(promise);
    });

  inFlightEmails.add(promise);
}

// For graceful shutdown - wait for all emails to complete
export async function flushPendingEmails(): Promise<void> {
  await Promise.all(inFlightEmails);
}

// Named exports
export { sendEmailAsync, flushPendingEmails };
```

---

## Pattern 2: Usage in API Route

Non-blocking email in a signup flow.

```typescript
// app/api/signup/route.ts
import { NextRequest, NextResponse } from "next/server";

import { auth } from "@/lib/auth";
import { sendEmailAsync } from "@/lib/email/async-email";
import { WelcomeEmail } from "@repo/emails";

export async function POST(request: NextRequest) {
  const body = await request.json();

  // Create user (blocking - required for response)
  const user = await auth.api.signUpEmail({
    body: {
      email: body.email,
      password: body.password,
      name: body.name,
    },
  });

  // Send welcome email asynchronously (non-blocking)
  sendEmailAsync({
    to: user.email,
    subject: "Welcome to Your App!",
    react: WelcomeEmail({
      userName: user.name ?? "there",
      loginUrl: `${process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_APP_URL}/login`,
    }),
  });

  // Return immediately - email sends in background
  return NextResponse.json({ success: true, user });
}
```

**Why good:** Signup response is fast (doesn't wait for email), email failures don't break the signup flow, flushPendingEmails enables graceful shutdown

---

## Pattern 3: Batch Email Function

Send to multiple recipients efficiently using Resend's batch API.

```typescript
// lib/email/batch-email.ts
import { render } from "@react-email/components";

import { getResendClient, DEFAULT_FROM_ADDRESS, DEFAULT_FROM_NAME } from "@repo/emails";

const MAX_BATCH_SIZE = 100; // Resend limit per batch request

interface BatchEmailItem {
  to: string;
  subject: string;
  react: React.ReactElement;
}

interface BatchSendResult {
  success: boolean;
  data?: { id: string }[];
  errors?: string[];
}

export async function sendBatchEmails(
  emails: BatchEmailItem[]
): Promise<BatchSendResult> {
  const resend = getResendClient();
  const results: { id: string }[] = [];
  const errors: string[] = [];

  // Split into batches of MAX_BATCH_SIZE
  for (let i = 0; i < emails.length; i += MAX_BATCH_SIZE) {
    const batch = emails.slice(i, i + MAX_BATCH_SIZE);

    // Render all emails in batch
    const renderedEmails = await Promise.all(
      batch.map(async (email) => ({
        from: `${DEFAULT_FROM_NAME} <${DEFAULT_FROM_ADDRESS}>`,
        to: email.to,
        subject: email.subject,
        html: await render(email.react),
      }))
    );

    try {
      const { data, error } = await resend.batch.send(renderedEmails);

      if (error) {
        errors.push(`Batch ${Math.floor(i / MAX_BATCH_SIZE) + 1}: ${error.message}`);
      } else if (data) {
        results.push(...data);
      }
    } catch (err) {
      const message = err instanceof Error ? err.message : "Unknown error";
      errors.push(`Batch ${Math.floor(i / MAX_BATCH_SIZE) + 1}: ${message}`);
    }
  }

  return {
    success: errors.length === 0,
    data: results.length > 0 ? results : undefined,
    errors: errors.length > 0 ? errors : undefined,
  };
}

// Named export
export { sendBatchEmails };
export type { BatchEmailItem, BatchSendResult };
```

---

## Pattern 4: Batch Usage Example

Send notifications to all team members.

```typescript
// Send notifications to all team members
import { sendBatchEmails } from "@/lib/email/batch-email";
import { NotificationEmail } from "@repo/emails";

async function notifyTeamMembers(
  members: { email: string; name: string }[],
  notification: { title: string; body: string; actionUrl: string }
) {
  const emails = members.map((member) => ({
    to: member.email,
    subject: notification.title,
    react: NotificationEmail({
      userName: member.name,
      notificationType: "update" as const,
      title: notification.title,
      body: notification.body,
      actionUrl: notification.actionUrl,
      actionText: "View Update",
      unsubscribeUrl: `https://example.com/unsubscribe?email=${member.email}`,
    }),
  }));

  const result = await sendBatchEmails(emails);

  if (!result.success) {
    console.error("[Email] Batch send had errors:", result.errors);
  }

  return result;
}
```

**Why good:** Handles Resend's 100-email batch limit, renders all templates in parallel, returns detailed results per batch

---

## Decision Tree: Single vs Batch

```
How many emails?
+-- 1 email --> resend.emails.send()
+-- 2-100 emails --> resend.batch.send()
+-- 100+ emails --> Loop with batch API

Need attachments or scheduling?
+-- YES --> Use resend.emails.send() (batch API doesn't support these)
+-- NO --> Can use resend.batch.send()
```

---

## Batch API Limitations

**Not Supported in Batch:**
- `attachments` field - use single send for emails with attachments
- `scheduledAt` field - use single send for scheduled emails
- Maximum 40MB per email after Base64 encoding (single send limit)

**Supported in Batch:**
- `tags` - for analytics and tracking
- `headers` (including Idempotency-Key)
- `cc` and `bcc` recipients
- Up to 50 recipients per email (`to` field)
